

The likelihood that an actual bug will make our programs produce the wrong output is almost nonexistent. It is much more likely that the source of the error is ourselves.

Defining a software bug
To understand what a software bug is, we can first look at Techopedia's definition:
"A software bug is a problem causing a program to crash or produce invalid output. The problem is caused by insufficient or erroneous logic. A bug can be an error, mistake, defect, or fault, which may cause failure or deviation from expected results."

Arithmetic errors
Arithmetic bugs, as the name suggests, have to do with arithmetic operations. There are a few things we should look out for, as outlined in the following sections.
Division by zero
Arithmetic overflow/underflow
Loss of precision

Logical errors
A logical error will usually not make a program crash but produce an unintended result. Unfortunately for us, there are a lot of opportunities to make logical errors.

One thing that has always amazed me is how hard it can be to get the logical operators right. Even though they are only two, it is very common that we use one instead of the other. Yes, even I do that at times.

An easier group of errors to amend is when the code is written so it can't run because we are breaking the language syntax rules. Let's take a look at these in more detail.
Syntax errors
The rules that tell us how code should be written in a particular language are called its syntax. When we write code that does not follow the syntax rules, we get what is called a syntax error.
These are rather easy to spot compared to many other errors as the compiler or interpreter will tell us where the problem is and also give us a hint about what the error is.

Syntax errors are, as mentioned previously, rather easy to find as the program will not run and we will be directed to a location close to where the error is. But how do we find bugs when we have logical errors? We have tools for this called debuggers.

Working with exceptions
An exception (short for exceptional event or exceptional condition) is an error or an unexpected event that occurs while a program is running. It is caused by a condition in the software where the program has reached a state where it can no longer run.
There are many reasons we can get an exception. One example could be if our program needs to read data from a file, but the file is not where it is supposed to be. Since the program has a reason to read the data from this file, a failure to do so will put the application in a state where it can no longer guarantee that its output will be correct. The best option, in this case, is just to halt the program and give back an error that hopefully instructs us about what the problem is so we can fix it.

As we saw, a missing file can be one reason we get an exception. Another common reason is that when we are trying to index into a sequence, we use an index that is larger than the sequence. 

How much we use exceptions, and how many different exceptions we will need to deal with the different issues available, will differ greatly between languages. Some, such as Java, make heavy use of exceptions. C++, on the other hand, has just a handful of built-in exceptions. Then, we have languages such as Go that don't have exceptions at all, but instead will let a function return an error type alongside the real return value from the function.

 One such exception will happen if we pide something by zero.

 Most languages support exceptions. Even if the number of exceptions a programming language has differs, the way they work will be pretty much the same, no matter what language we are using. The names will differ, as well as what kinds of exceptions we have, but the way we work with them will be the same.
At times, it can be hard to understand the output we get from an exception. The reason for this is that when we get an exception, something called the call stack is also printed.

Keeping track of where we are in this chain of function calls is called the call stack, and that is handled by the programming language when we run the program.

To understand how we can handle exceptions, we must first understand what the origins of a problem might be. It is only when we have understood this that we can insert measures to handle them correctly.

The first thing we should ask ourselves is if this is the best place to handle the problem. It could be, but most likely, it is not. This function is getting two values sent to it as arguments. Several parts of the application might use the function, so it has no way of knowing the source of the data that is being sent to it.

Let's see how we can handle an exception when we call a function. The call to the function would then need to be within a special block of code called a try statement. It could look something like this:

Here, we can see that the call to the calculate function is located within a try block.
If everything is fine and we return from the function without any exception, the program will jump to the line after end_catch and resume its execution.
But if we get an exception and that exception is of the ZeroDivisionError type, we will end up in the block below, which begins with a catch.
Here, we can see that the call to the calculate function is located within a try block.
If everything is fine and we return from the function without any exception, the program will jump to the line after end_catch and resume its execution.
But if we get an exception and that exception is of the ZeroDivisionError type, we will end up in the block below, which begins with a catch.
Exceptions can be caught, but we need to specify what exception it is we want to handle. If we get another exception, one that does not have a matching catch, the program will crash as before.

Calling the function like this could be a solution for us, but is it a good solution? Not really. Imagine that the calculate function is located in a different module that is in a different file. It might even be written by somebody else. 

we should at least assume that the users do not know anything about how the function is written.
Therefore, we could not assume that they will use a ZeroDivisionError exception in their catch statement. Instead, we could give them another exception that might make more sense.

if y == 0 then
  throw ValueError("Second argument cannot be zero")

this time, one called ValueError. We are also passing a string to this exception. If someone now calls our function and gives us a value of zero for y, they will get this exception with the message we provided.

We can say that this is the location that owns the data and therefore has the opportunity to change it.

Exceptions are a great way to handle conditions when we can't decide what to do due to a condition that we could not predict when we wrote the program. Without them, it would be very difficult to signal to other parts of the program that something is wrong. We should use them when we need to, but also ensure proper care. Exceptions always send a clear message regarding what is wrong and assist the author of the code that receives the exception with understanding what the problem is.